upd Readme (#1)
DevExpress-Examples/asp-net-mvc-grid-custom-binding-and-xpo: Readme.md

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Open_in_DevExpress_Support_Center-FF7200?style=flat-square&logo=DevExpress&logoColor=white)](https://supportcenter.devexpress.com/ticket/details/T602001)
[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/📖_How_to_use_DevExpress_Examples-e9f6fc?style=flat-square)](https://docs.devexpress.com/GeneralInformation/403183)
<!-- default badges end -->

# GridView for ASP.NET MVC - How to use Custom Data Binding and XPO to bind a grid to a table with an unknown schema

> This example demonstrates an edge-case scenario and uses XPO in an uncommon way. Refer to the following articles for XPO best practices:

Reviewer: `in an uncommon way` Which implies what?

Author: I'll remote the first paragraph

* [DevExpress XPO ORM for .NET Framework / .NET Core / .NET Standard 2.0](https://github.com/DevExpress/XPO/tree/master/Tutorials/ASP.NET/WebForms/CS)
* [How to bind editors to XPO objects in an ASP.NET MVC application](https://supportcenter.devexpress.com/ticket/details/k18525/how-to-bind-editors-to-xpo-objects-in-an-asp-net-mvc-application)

The approach demonstrated in this example can be used when you need to take advantage of the [partial data loading](https://docs.devexpress.com/AspNetMvc/14760/components/grid-view/binding-to-data/binding-to-large-data-database-server-mode) feature, but cannot use statically declared business models mapped to the database. This approach allows you to add and remove database columns without modifying the application code, to implement a generic View consuming data from an arbitrary table (or even database) selected by the user, or to implement a SaaS application.

## Prerequisites

This example is based on the following technologies:

> 1. [eXpress Persistent Objects](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/1998/express-persistent-objects) (aka XPO) are used as a data access layer. Refer to tutorials in our online documentation to get started with XPO: [Getting Started](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/2263/getting-started).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [eXpress Persistent Objects](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/1998/express-persistent-objects) (XPO) are used as a data access layer. Refer to tutorials in our online documentation to get started with XPO: [Getting Started](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/2263/getting-started).
```

> 2. XPO supports dynamic mapping to the database tables without declaring any classes.  Refer to the following article to learn more about this functionality: [How to create persistent metadata on the fly and load data from an arbitrary table](https://supportcenter.devexpress.com/ticket/details/k18482/how-to-create-persistent-metadata-on-the-fly-and-load-data-from-an-arbitrary-table).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. XPO supports dynamic mapping to the database tables without declaring any classes.  Refer to the following article for more information about this functionality: [How to create persistent metadata on the fly and load data from an arbitrary table](https://supportcenter.devexpress.com/ticket/details/k18482/how-to-create-persistent-metadata-on-the-fly-and-load-data-from-an-arbitrary-table).
```

> 3. Our [GridView](https://docs.devexpress.com/AspNetMvc/8966/components/grid-view) component for ASP.NET MVC platform supports [Custom Data Binding](https://docs.devexpress.com/AspNetMvc/14321/components/grid-view/binding-to-data/custom-data-binding) that allows you to populate a grid with data manually taking into account the current grid state (filtering, sorting, grouping).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Our [GridView](https://docs.devexpress.com/AspNetMvc/8966/components/grid-view) component for ASP.NET MVC platform supports [Custom Data Binding](https://docs.devexpress.com/AspNetMvc/14321/components/grid-view/binding-to-data/custom-data-binding) that allows you to populate a grid with data while taking into account the current grid state (filtering, sorting, grouping).
```

> 4. The [XPCollection](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/DevExpress.Xpo.XPCollection) object can be used to load objects with unknown type at compile time. The [XPView](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/DevExpress.Xpo.XPView) object allows you to build complex queries with grouping, filtering, sorting and data aggregation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The [XPCollection](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/DevExpress.Xpo.XPCollection) object can be used to load objects with unknown type at compile time. The [XPView](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/DevExpress.Xpo.XPView) object allows you to build complex queries with grouping, filtering, sorting, and data aggregation.
```

> Refer to our online documentation to understand concepts used in this example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to our online documentation for more information about the concepts used in this example.
```

## Implementation details

> 1. To change the persistent classes schema at run time, it is necessary to create a separate [Data Access Layer](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/2123/connect-to-a-data-store) for each user, instead of sharing a single [ThreadSafeDataLayer](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/DevExpress.Xpo.ThreadSafeDataLayer) instance between all users as it recommended to do in regular scenarios.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. To change the persistent classes schema at run time, you need to create a separate [Data Access Layer](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/2123/connect-to-a-data-store) for each user instead of sharing a single [ThreadSafeDataLayer](https://docs.devexpress.com/XPO/DevExpress.Xpo.ThreadSafeDataLayer) instance between all users.  
```

 
1. The [XpoBindingHandlers.cs](./CS/XPCustomBindingExample/XPO/XpoBindingHandlers.cs) (VB: [XpoBindingHandlers.vb](./VB/XPCustomBindingExample/XPO/XpoBindingHandlers.vb)) file contains a universal class that can be used in real projects without modifications. It provides the [implementation of typed method delegates](https://docs.devexpress.com/AspNetMvc/14553/components/grid-view/binding-to-data/custom-data-binding/implementation-of-typed-method-delegates) required to calling to a grid view model's [GridViewModel.ProcessCustomBinding](https://docs.devexpress.com/AspNetMvc/DevExpress.Web.Mvc.GridViewModel.ProcessCustomBinding.overloads) method. The usage is demonstrated in the [OrdersController.cs](./CS/XPCustomBindingExample/Controllers/OrdersController.cs) (VB: [OrdersController.vb](./VB/XPCustomBindingExample/Controllers/OrdersController.vb)) file.
 
 
## How to use

To add this functionality to an existing ASP.NET MVC project, do the following:

> 1. Copy the [XpoHelper.cs](./CS/XPCustomBindingExample/XPO/XpoHelper.cs) (VB: [XpoHelper.vb](./VB/XPCustomBindingExample/XPO/XpoHelper.vb)) file to your project. If the project already contains a similar helper class, you can replace it or use both the implementations together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Copy the [XpoHelper.cs](./CS/XPCustomBindingExample/XPO/XpoHelper.cs) (VB: [XpoHelper.vb](./VB/XPCustomBindingExample/XPO/XpoHelper.vb)) file to your project. If the project already contains a similar helper class, you can replace it or use both implementations together.
```
